Les avertissements sanitaires sur les paquets de tabac – L’étude NUHWTOPAC

Statut tri : rejected
Source : IReSP
URL : https://iresp.net/projets_finances/les-avertissements-sanitaires-sur-les-paquets-de-tabac-letude-nuhwtopac/
Programme concerné : Addictions
Nom de l'appel : Appel à projets de recherche et d’intervention pour réduire et lutter contre le tabagisme
Année : 2018
État du projet : Clos
Durée : 18 mois
Subvention allouée : 48 802
Financeurs : Fonds de Lutte Contre le Tabac
Disciplines : Psychologie ; Économie de la santé ; Économie expérimentale ; Étude des comportements économiques

Les avertissements sanitaires sur les paquets de tabac - L'étude NUHWTOPAC - IReSP
L’IReSP
L’institut
Missions
Organisation
Les instances
Équipe
Actualités
Contact
Thématiques
Addictions
Autonomie, grand âge et handicap
Services, interventions et politiques favorables à la santé
Programme Antiépileptiques
MESSIDORE
Portail des études en santé
Financements
Les financements à L’IResp
Programmes et appels
Procédure d’évaluation
Programme Addictions
Programme Antiépileptiques
Programme Autonomie, grand âge et handicap
Programme MESSIDORE
Programme Services, interventions et politiques favorables à la santé
Appel à projets clos
Subventions hors appels à projets
Suivi des projets financés
Projets financés
Animation
L’animation de la recherche en Santé Publique
Evènements à venir
Toutes nos actions
Ressources des actions d’animation
Ressources
Lettre d’information en santé publique
Revue « Questions de Santé Publique »
Publications de l’IReSP
Offres d’emploi en Santé Publique
Accueil
»
Les avertissements sanitaires sur les paquets de tabac – L’étude NUHWTOPAC
Programme concerné
Addictions
Nom de l'appel
Appel à projets de recherche et d’intervention pour réduire et lutter contre le tabagisme
Année
2018
Modalité de soutien
Projet d’amorçage et pilote
État du projet
Clos
Durée
18 mois
Subvention allouée
48 802
Financeurs
Fonds de Lutte Contre le Tabac
Disciplines
Psychologie ; Économie de la santé ; Économie expérimentale ; Étude des comportements économiques
Les avertissements sanitaires sur les paquets de tabac – L’étude NUHWTOPAC
Résumé de soumission
Scientific context, objectives, research hypothesis
One of the last anti-smoking policies implemented in France, standardized packaging (or plain packaging) annihilates the main communication and advertising tool of the tobacco industry. Today, the French population, smokers and non-smokers, is no longer exposed to the marketing of the tobacco industry through the packaging but, on the contrary, is informed, among other things, about consequences and dangers of smoking for self or for others thanks to textual and visual health warnings.
In our research project, we assume that the impact of these warnings on smoking prevalence or other public health indicators could be improved. We assume that conscious and unconscious barriers may prevent smokers from being fully receptive to current health warnings. Indeed, smokers do not use all the cognitive and psychological means that would lead to the desired behavioural change. On this basis, we assume that nudges, other than those already implemented (health consequences, socio-economic consequences, quitting, parental smoking), can improve the effectiveness of warnings. Warnings based on empowerment, self- and social image, social comparison or framing effects in the presentation of the architecture of choice, can remove the mental barriers raised toward health warnings and have a greater impact in terms of behavioural change for smokers. A sub-assumption of the research project deals with the greater efficacy of warnings associated with plain packs as compared to branded packaging: the standardized packaging would reinforce the impact of health warnings.
Method
In order to test our assumptions, on the basis of an extended review of the literature, we will construct warnings based on nudges built on empowerment messages, self- and social image, social comparison and on framing effects. Then, in an experimental setting, we will compare these nudged warnings (displayed on plain packs) to current health warnings by submitting them to 700 participants aged 18-25yo (smokers and non-smokers) while controlling individual characteristics (temporal and risks preferences…). The effectiveness of nudged warnings compared to conventional health warnings will be assessed by different behavioural indicators such as smoking behaviors, quitting intents, willingness to buy for nicotine substitutes, willingness to pay for not being subject to the nudge, etc. Here, the novelty is that we will seek to measure the effect of nudged warnings (vs. controls), in evaluating the monetary sacrifice an individual is ready to bear by comparison to another individual in order to get goods allowing or helping him/her to quit smoking.
Expected public health impact
The expected results of this research project are twofold. On the one hand, a first result, if confirmed by our research project, is of great importance for spreading the use of the plain packaging around the world. Indeed, if these first results confirm the greater effectiveness of the health warnings thanks to the reinforcement of standardised packaging, the policy-makers will have interest to implement this tool of fight against smoking. From a scientific point of view, this would also have the advantage of showing that it is not only the enlargement of the pictograms that increase their efficiency, but also the entire modification of the support of the warning, namely the tobacco package itself, through the annihilation of brand marketing.
On the other hand, if our main working hypothesis is confirmed, namely that the use of non-sanitary nudges on tobacco packages is more effective than traditional health warnings, our research project helps to provide tobacco control policies with new tools. Thus, this project would give to the national and international community new visuals and new texts to be put on plain or branded tobacco packs.
Perspectives
The main perspective is a field replication of this research project. A full-scale experiment could be conducted by forcing as far as possible, the tobacco industry to print our experimental nudged warnings on tobacco packages delivered in one or two French regions and not in others. We would thus benefit from an experience with two regions tested and the rest of France as control. We could stall this experiment on the temporality of representative national health survey of the « Santé Publique France » agency (Baromètre Santé) to obtain robust prevalence measures (and other measures) over time and in regional space.
Finally, another perspective that this research project raises concerns other harmful substances. Indeed, the generalization of more consistent health warnings than current ones on products containing alcohol is expected in France but also in other countries. Similarly, health warnings regarding legalized cannabis in North America or new psychoactive substances legalized in New Zealand could benefit from the results of our research.
Synthèse finale du projet
NUHWTOPAC
Productions scientifiques et communications (
Liste non exhaustive
)
Ben Lakhdar C, Deplancke A, Le Lec F, et al. Protocol for creating new warnings on cigarette packs and evaluating their efficacy in a randomised experimental setting. BMJ Open 2020;10:e036166. doi:10.1136/ bmjopen-2019-036166
Ben Lakhdar, C., Deplancke, A., Fabrice, L. E., Massin, S., Piermatteo, A., & Vaillant, N. G. (2025). ‘You can quit!’: Exploring the efficacy of new cigarette pack warnings through an experiment. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics, 102452.
Ben Lakhdar C, Deplancke A, Le Lec F, et al. (2020) Protocol for creating new warnings on cigarette packs and evaluating their efficacy in a randomised experimental setting. BMJ Open 2020;10:e036166. doi:10.1136/ bmjopen-2019-036166
Présentation NUWHTOPAC - Café de l'IReSP du 20/04/22
Ben Lakhdar, C., Deplancke, A., Fabrice, L. E., et al., (2025) ‘You can quit!’: Exploring the efficacy of new cigarette pack warnings through an experiment. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics, 102452.
Equipes du projet
Coordonnateur :
BEN LAKHDAR Christian
N° ORCID :
0000-0002-1572-3389
Structure administrative de rattachement :
Université de Lille
Laboratoire ou équipe :
Lille – Economie – Management (LEM) UMR 9221 CNRS
N° RNSR :
201521703E
Autres équipes participantes :
Responsable de l'équipe 2 : LE LEC Fabrice
Institut Catholique de Lille, ETHICS EA 7446
Vous êtes porteur/membre du projet et vous souhaitez faire une mise à jour ?
Dites-le nous !
LES ACTUALITÉS
03/03/2026
Enrichissez le catalogue des études en santé humaine
> Lire la suite
27/02/2026
Deuil après suicide : résultats de la recherche ESPOIR²S sur les besoins et l’accompagnement numérique
> Lire la suite
05/02/2026
Troubles de l’usage des opioïdes : pourquoi les médecins généralistes sont-ils de moins en moins nombreux à initier certains médicaments ?
> Lire la suite
10/04/2025
FReSH, le portail des études en santé
> Lire la suite
LES MEMBRES DE L'IRESP
INSCRIVEZ-VOUS A NOTRE NEWSLETTER
L'institut
Missions
Organisation
Les instances de l'IReSP
Équipe
Contact
Recrutement
Mentions légales
Politique de confidentialité
IReSP
Institut pour la Recherche en Santé Publique
Paris Biopark
Bâtiment A – 1er étage
8, rue de la croix Jarry
75013 Paris
01 82 53 34 64
info@iresp.net
Agence Web AUDOUIN REALISATIONS